0.
Dyson’s laser-equipped vacuum is one of the latest examples of cleaning tech, products that are designed to make our household hygiene as painless and efficient as possible. It’s an increasingly important category of technology now that the pandemic has forced so many of us to spend lots of time at home, creating messes that never seem to go away.
1.
When the contest was held last October, none of the eight entrants made it all the way up the ribbon. But Mr. Jones's Snowstar machine traveled farthest, all of 20 feet. The hexagonal array of solar cells, powering two pairs of rollers that shimmied up the ribbon, was judged Most Likely to Win in the 2006 challenge, set for August. The prize has been increased to $250,000 this year, from $50,000. To win, the climbers must make it up the ribbon in less than a minute. So far, 19 teams have signed up, nearly twice as many as in 2005. 
2.
Many of NASA's contests also center on robotics. The Telerobotic Construction Challenge, scheduled for August 2007, requires a team of machines to assemble items with minimal human supervision. The idea is to let robots,instead of astronauts, build shelters and machinery on the moon and Mars. In the Regolith Excavation Challenge, set for May 2007, an autonomous machine will have to dig through 24 square meters of simulated moon rock. A separate Regolith Oxygen competition, scheduled for 2008, will be held for robots that can extract oxygen from the stones. Some contests will be held annually; others will be one-time events.
3.
In a year filled with Covid-related hopes, setbacks, advances and losses, the most vital exercise science of 2021 provided a reminder that for many of us, our bodies and minds can strengthen, endure and flourish, no matter our circumstances. If we move our bodies in the right ways, a growing body of evidence suggests we might live with greater stamina, purpose and cognitive clarity for many years to come. And it may not take much movement.
4.
In fact, some of the year’s biggest fitness news concerned how little exercise we might be able to get away with, while maintaining or even improving our health. A study from January, for instance, showed that just five minutesof intense calisthenics substantially improved college students’ aerobic fitness and leg strength. Another series of studies from the University of Texas found that four seconds — yes, seconds — of ferocious bicycle pedaling, repeated several times was enough to raise adults’ strength and endurance, whatever their age or health when they started.
5.
Even people whose favorite workout is walking might need less than they think to reach an exercise sweet spot, other new research suggested. As I wrote in July,  the familiar goal of 10,000 daily steps, deeply embedded in  our activity trackers and collective consciousness, has little scientific validity. It is a myth that grew out of a marketing accident, and a study published summer further debunked it, finding that people who took between 7,000  and 8,000 steps a day, or a little more than three miles, generally lived longer than those strolling less or accumulating more than 10,000 steps. So keep moving, but there’s no need to fret if your total doesn’t reach a five-figure step count.
6.
You may have long thought your blood pressure was within normal limits. But in 2017, based on better long-term data, experts lowered the numbers that constitute a healthy blood pressure, resulting in a greater proportion of the population with this risky condition. The former upper limit of “normal” blood pressure, once believed to be 140 over 90 millimeters of mercury, was recognized as too high to prevent serious health problems over time. The current upper limit of normal is 130 over 80, and a blood pressure consistently above 120 over 80 is now considered problematic.
7.
The study involved 27,599 adults, 35.4 percent of whom had uncontrolled hypertension, who were part of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys. The periodic surveys, which are known as NHANES and track the health of a representative sample of Americans, found that many people took medications and other substances that could raise an otherwise normal blood pressure or limit the effectiveness of treatment prescribed to lower an elevated blood pressure.
8.
There’s a long list of prescribed medications, as well as over-the-counter drugs and recreational substances and supplements, that can interfere with effective treatment for hypertension. In addition to estrogen-containing drugs and NSAIDS, the list includes widely used medicines like antidepressants and oral steroids such as cortisone; substances like nicotine, alcohol and cocaine; herbal supplements like licorice or ginseng; and, of course, salt.Caffeine, too, can raise blood pressure over the short-term in some people.
9.
In recent weeks, as they have braced for the release of the film and the criticism it levels at a system that long prioritized winning over everything else, Olympic officials past and present have noted all the perks Phelps received during his career, including top training and coaching, access to cutting-edge technology and a two-bedroom suite at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs that only he and the occasional visiting physician used if he wasn’t there. Everyone else slept in single or double rooms.
10.
But that uneven treatment and response to the film,Phelps said in an interview this week, illustrates how Olympic officials and coaches view athletes as valuable assets during their brief windows of Olympic glory, but then leave them largely on their own during the years between Games. And when their careers are interrupted or over, the system moves on to the next star.“I feel like they don’t care about anything I do right now,” Phelps, 35, said of the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee.
11.
In recent months, the committee,which says it has always welcomed and wanted Phelps’s input, has formed a mental health task force to help change and expand a system that its chief executive, Sarah Hirshland, has made clear needs to be updated. The organization takes roughly 1,000 athletes combined to the Winter and Summer Olympics during each four-year cycle but has just three mental health officers on its staff. 
12.
In a room with grimy walls and a few soiled blankets, I met Jawad and Shukria, a newlywed couple who had recently arrived from Kabul. Slender and reserved, they were wearing matching maroon sweaters, Shukria’s under a beige head scarf. (For their safety I am using only their first names.) Jawad had studied biochemistry, and had saved up enough by working in a hospital to open his own small medical lab. That was where he met Shukria, who hadn’t finished her university studies. Theirs was a love marriage, uncommon in Afghanistan; they had wed against his parents’ wishes. “I didn’t take any money from them,” Jawad told me with a touch of pride, as Shukria smiled.
13.
The desert road from Nimruz was normally used by the poorest Afghans, those who couldn’t afford passports or visas to Iran. The smuggler whom Jawad and Shukria had paid told me that most of his clients were going there to find work — what Western governments label “economic migrants.” But when the Taliban captured Kabul and the country’s border crossings, there’d been a rush of government officials, journalists and civil society activists who fled to Nimruz — I was told that a prominent female governor had passed through this hotel, in disguise, shortly after the collapse — to make the dangerous, illegal crossing alongside the male laborers.
14.
When the United States toppled the Taliban in 2001, millions of Afghans returned home, in the largest voluntary refugee repatriation program in U.N. history. They wanted to rebuild their country, and hoped that the West would keep its promises of security and development. But as violence got worse, Afghans started to doubt those promises and leave again, heading overland to Europe, or taking boats from Southeast Asia to Australia. And as their asylum claims rose, Western countries stepped up efforts to keep Afghans out. It became increasingly difficult for them to get visas to visit or study abroad, for fear they would claim refugee status.
15.
As things stand, partially autonomous vehicles are already on American roads, rigged out with features like automatic emergency braking and lane-departure warnings. But a lot of work remains to be done to make fully self-operating cars a fact of everyday life, and Retro Report explores some of the remaining obstacles: Streets and highways need to be mapped, down to a few centimeters. The machines must learn to grapple with snow or rain,which can throw their sensors out of whack. They will have to step up their game if they are to be able to respond instantly to the unexpected, be it a falling tree branch or a child darting into the road from between parked cars.
16.
As things stand, partially autonomous vehicles are already on American roads, rigged out with features like automatic emergency braking and lane-departure warnings. But a lot of work remains to be done to make fully self-operating cars a fact of everyday life, and Retro Report explores some of the remaining obstacles: Streets and highways need to be mapped, down to a few centimeters. The machines must learn to grapple with snow or rain,which can throw their sensors out of whack. They will have to step up their game if they are to be able to respond instantly to the unexpected, be it a falling tree branch or a child darting into the road from between parked cars.
17.
Waymo — its name drawn from the slogan “WAY forward in MObile” — operates a driverless taxi service in a Phoenix suburb, and so far, so good. Then again, it’s Phoenix, where sunshine prevails and roadways are relatively benign. “A critical part of working as well as we do is being selective in what we attempt to drive,” Mr. Chatham acknowledged to Retro Report. “We are not driving in the dense traffic of Mumbai, where you have really hairy traffic conditions. We are not yet driving in the worst blizzard that you can imagine.”
18.
State-aligned media — which, in Hungary, is almost all media — had been blasting out Kremlin talking points for weeks, and it was easy to find people in the crowd who echoed them. An older man in a traditional black Bocskai jacket described Russia’s invasion as “just” and Volodymyr Zelensky as “scum” before blaming George Soros and the Freemasons for the war. A middle-aged woman expressed sympathy for Ukrainian refugees but accused Ukraine of provoking Russia by oppressing Russian and Hungarian speakers. “You don’t wake a sleeping lion,” she said.
19.
In the coming elections, Marki-Zay is an underdog, but the fact that he’s even in the running is a remarkable development in a country with a system as tilted as Hungary’s. Hungarian electoral districts are highly gerrymandered in favor of Orban’s party, Fidesz. Gergely Karacsony, the left-leaning mayor of Budapest and a political scientist, said the anti-Orban forces would probably need to win the popular vote by three or four percentage points to achieve a parliamentary majority. (By contrast, in the last elections Fidesz was able to win a two-thirds majority with 49 percent of the vote.) The opposition has had to contend with a near blackout in the mainstream media; Marki-Zay said he hasn’t been asked to appear on television since 2019, while Orban has unleashed a barrage of propaganda against him.
20.
Bogdan Klich, the minority leader in Poland’s Senate, watched from backstage. He hoped that a Marki-Zay victory would be a blow to anti-democratic forces in his own country. “There is a chance that illiberal democracy, that was presented and unfortunately implemented by Viktor Orban here, will be replaced by traditional European and Atlantic values,” he said. “I mean the rule of law, the respect for human rights and civil liberties, independence of judiciary, etc. This is what we need here in Hungary, and in Poland.”
21.
As European and American officials press Facebook, Twitter, TikTok and other online platforms to clamp down on Russian disinformation, China has embraced Russia’s propaganda and lies about the war. China’s state-owned media outlets quoted their Russian counterparts’ coverage without verification, helping to magnify their disinformation on the Chinese internet. They put Russian officials on state television networks with little pushback on their claims.
22.
Many Chinese media organizations admire RT and Sputnik, which they believe have broken the West’s information monopoly, or at least muddied the water. Many media experts have analyzed what China’s state-owned media could learn from their successes. One academic paper detailed RT’s coverage of Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 to illustrate how the Russian network carefully planned its reporting strategy to increase its seeming credibility and accessibility so it could set its own agenda.
23.
The fog of disinformation thickens when Chinese state media portrays Russia’s war as an anti-fascism effort. After Russia’s defense minister announced this week that his country would host the first international anti-fascism conference in August, the CCTV posted a one-paragraph story, then created a Weibo hashtag. Within 24 hours, it had 650 million views and was used by 90 media outlets. Many commenters called Ukraine and the United States fascist countries.
24.
Britain has long had a reputation for plaintiff-friendly libel laws, and despite reform efforts in the past decade, the country has remained an accommodating home away from home for Russia’s robber barons. Until the war in Ukraine changed the political climate, the public here knew little about the history of the men who earned their fortunes by allying themselves with Mr. Putin, in no small part because reporting on them could prove financially ruinous.
25.
A libel lawyer on speed dial is just one of the many comforts and conveniences that British professionals offer oligarchs from around the world. A few trillion pounds have sloshed through London, with an assist from real estate agents eager to sell prime property and lawyers and bankers ready to launder cash in offshore havens, writes Oliver Bullough, author of “Butler to the World: How Britain Became the Servant of Tycoons, Tax Dodgers, Kleptocrats and Criminals.”
26.
If this was supposed to embolden the media, it did not work, said Andrew Scott, an associate professor at the London School of Economics, who conferred with the Ministry of Justice as it drafted the law. The standards needed to win a defamation case were raised, he noted, but nothing was done to address the cost of the process. With journalists and publishers still facing the prospect of hugely expensive legal fees incurred battling angry oligarchs, there was little change.
27.
The central government is still pushing officials across the country to stamp out the virus, deploying measures that are among the world’s strictest, including isolating anyone who tests positive and enforcing quarantines on people deemed at risk of infection. White-collar employees, shoppers and diners have been forced to isolate inside offices, stores and restaurants if they were deemed to be close contacts. People who test positive are either sent to hospitals or to government isolation facilities set up in schools, exhibition centers and other spaces.
28.
China has been grappling with the country’s largest outbreak since the pandemic began in Wuhan more than two years ago. The government’s fear is that an uncontrolled spread could overwhelm hospitals and cause a catastrophic loss of life. Large numbers of Chinese adults 80 and older are unvaccinated, and there is little immunity from earlier infections. Hong Kong’s struggle to contain a Covid outbreak has offered a glimpse of what that might look like: deaths there spiked in recent weeks, particularly among unvaccinated older adults.
29.
Ivy Sun, a 32-year-old counselor, had been looking forward to freedom after being held in her home under a five-day lockdown on her neighborhood. On Sunday, following the announcement of the citywide closure, she was suddenly allowed a breath of fresh air, but just for seven hours. She and her neighbors rushed out to get groceries and other supplies for yet another confinement.“It felt like an apocalyptic scene. Everyone ran out. A lot of people were on the streets near the neighborhood, and all the stores were filled with people,” Ms. Sun said.
30.
Food safety experts say that while you shouldn’t eat berries that are obviously moldy, those without visible signs of the spores are fine to eat. And luckily, unlike other food safety concerns that may be invisible to the naked eye, berries with mold growth are easy to spot, said Benjamin Chapman, a professor and food safety specialist at North Carolina State University. (Botanically minded readers may note that many fruits commonly known as berries, including strawberries, raspberries and blackberries, aren’t true berries, but we will describe them as such for the sake of simplicity.)
31.
Mold is a common enemy of berry growers and sellers, so it’s not surprising to find it in your berry basket, Dr. Mitcham said. Mold spores are ubiquitous in the environment; they can be carried by air or water and live in the soil of farm fields. The spores typically infect a berry plant’s flowers or fruit and then lie dormant until the fruit fully ripens. Given enough time, those spores will eventually germinate and can spread to adjoining fruits, especially in warmer temperatures, Dr. Mitcham said.
32.
Molds become more dangerous when they grow and invade deeper into the food product, where some types produce toxins. While this isn’t usually a problem with berries because of their shape, small size and the types of molds that grow on them, it is a greater concern with larger foods that are moist or have a soft or porous texture, like leftover meats or casseroles, jams and jellies, soft cheeses and breads. If there is mold on the surface of these foods, you should assume they are contaminated within and throw them away, according to the U.S.D.A.
33.
Consumer advocates say the need is urgent. Just this week, federal health authorities said an outbreak of salmonella, most likely caused by cucumbers imported from Mexico, had sickened 341 people in 30 states. Seventy of those people were hospitalized and two have died, one in Texas and one in California. Also this year, Blue Bell Creameries, an ice cream producer with plants in Texas, Oklahoma and Alabama, had to recall all its products after 10 people became ill with listeria from eating them. Three of those people died.
34.
Under the rules, food makers will be required to keep written records, effectively a sort of safety activity log for the production center, and F.D.A. inspectors will have the right to review them. That is a big change. Before, plants were not required to hand over records to inspectors, said David Plunkett, a senior staff lawyer at the Center for Science in the Public Interest’s food safety program. In 2005, an operator at a Peter Pan peanut butter factory refused to hand over records to an F.D.A. inspector, and the following year around 600 people fell ill from its products, he said.
35.
About 48 million Americans a year become sick from food-borne diseases and 3,000 die, according to federal data, tallies that many health officials say could be significantly reduced if the food industry took a more proactive role in monitoring and reducing risks. But carrying out the law, the Food Safety Modernization Act, which was the first significant update of the Food and Drug Administration’s food safety authority in 70 years, has been criticized as slow.
36.
In the region of Guangxi, which borders Vietnam, customs officials found that some of the smuggled frozen meat “was more than 40 years old,” according to The China Daily newspaper. Chinese officials did not explain where the meat originated or how it had been stored for almost two generations. After being refrozen, the meat was sold to retailers, supermarkets and restaurants across the country. China Central Television, the state broadcaster, showed workers in the southern city of Shenzhen repackaging the imported meat with Chinese labels, even though imported products, if legal, tend to be more profitable.
37.
Food scandals are a politically sensitive issue in China, where tainted food has sickened huge numbers of people. In 2008, milk powder tainted with melamine, a toxic industrial compound, made 300,000 babies ill and six died. Since then, the country has encountered watermelons that exploded from the misuse of a growth accelerator chemical, pork soaked in a detergent additive, steamed buns tainted with pesticides, and 15,000 dead pigs drifting down the Huangpu River in Shanghai.
38.
But the news of 40-year-old frozen meat being sold to consumers has left even the most seasoned experts in shock. Bob Delmore, an expert on meat science at Colorado State University, said that although it was possible for meat to last that long frozen, it would be covered by “a tremendous amount of freezer burn” as the product lost moisture and the flesh degraded. But once it began to thaw, a consumer would immediately know something was wrong. “The dead giveaway would be the odor and the taste,” he said.

